README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <img src="https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/wzQKEsTFkrgNQO9JjhGH5wFvslJr1saLtLaJ_a6Fp_gNENpvt3VG7BmztwngU9hFJaU4CPwGiw1opQtDvTkLrxWRbO_a12Q-pdESWHgtmheIHcPbOL5ZMC4TSiJVe5ty1w=w3517" alt="Triton logo">
</div>

The Triton Conference is happening again on September 17th, 2024 in Fremont (CA)!

If you are interested in attending, please fill up [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSecHC1lkalcm0h3JDUbspekDX5bmBvMxgVTLaK3e-61bzDDbg/viewform).


| **`Documentation`** | **`Nightly Wheels`** |
|-------------------- | -------------------- |
| [![Documentation](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/actions/workflows/documentation.yml/badge.svg)](https://triton-lang.org/) | [![Wheels](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/actions/workflows/wheels.yml/badge.svg?branch=release/2.0.x)](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/actions/workflows/wheels.yml) |


# Triton

This is the development repository of Triton, a language and compiler for writing highly efficient custom Deep-Learning primitives. The aim of Triton is to provide an open-source environment to write fast code at higher productivity than CUDA, but also with higher flexibility than other existing DSLs.

The foundations of this project are described in the following MAPL2019 publication: [Triton: An Intermediate Language and Compiler for Tiled Neural Network Computations](http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~htk/publication/2019-mapl-tillet-kung-cox.pdf). Please consider citing this work if you use Triton!

The [official documentation](https://triton-lang.org) contains installation instructions and tutorials.  See also these third-party [Triton puzzles](https://github.com/srush/Triton-Puzzles), which can all be run using the Triton interpreter -- no GPU required.

# Quick Installation

You can install the latest stable release of Triton from pip:

```bash
pip install triton
```
Binary wheels are available for CPython 3.8-3.12 and PyPy 3.8-3.9.

And the latest nightly release:

```bash
pip install -U --index-url https://aiinfra.pkgs.visualstudio.com/PublicPackages/_packaging/Triton-Nightly/pypi/simple/ triton-nightly
```

# Install from source

```
git clone https://github.com/triton-lang/triton.git;
cd triton;

pip install ninja cmake wheel pybind11; # build-time dependencies
pip install -e python
```

Or with a virtualenv:

```
git clone https://github.com/triton-lang/triton.git;
cd triton;

python -m venv .venv --prompt triton;
source .venv/bin/activate;

pip install ninja cmake wheel pybind11; # build-time dependencies
pip install -e python
```

# Building with a custom LLVM

Triton uses LLVM to generate code for GPUs and CPUs.  Normally, the Triton build
downloads a prebuilt LLVM, but you can also build LLVM from source and use that.

LLVM does not have a stable API, so the Triton build will not work at an
arbitrary LLVM version.

1. Find the version of LLVM that Triton builds against.  Check
`cmake/llvm-hash.txt` to see the current version. For example, if it says:
       49af6502c6dcb4a7f7520178bd14df396f78240c

   This means that the version of Triton you have builds against
   [LLVM](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project) 49af6502.

2. `git checkout` LLVM at this revision.  Optionally, make additional
   modifications to LLVM.

3. [Build LLVM](https://llvm.org/docs/CMake.html).  For example, you might run

       $ cd $HOME/llvm-project  # your clone of LLVM.
       $ mkdir build
       $ cd build
       $ cmake -G Ninja -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON ../llvm -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="mlir;llvm" -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="host;NVPTX;AMDGPU"
       $ ninja

4. Grab a snack, this will take a while.

5. Build Triton as above, but set the following environment variables.

       # Modify as appropriate to point to your LLVM build.
       $ export LLVM_BUILD_DIR=$HOME/llvm-project/build

       $ cd <triton install>
       $ LLVM_INCLUDE_DIRS=$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/include \
         LLVM_LIBRARY_DIR=$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/lib \
         LLVM_SYSPATH=$LLVM_BUILD_DIR \
         pip install -e python

# Tips for building

- Set `TRITON_BUILD_WITH_CLANG_LLD=true` as an environment variable to use clang
  and lld.  lld in particular results in faster builds.

- Set `TRITON_BUILD_WITH_CCACHE=true` to build with ccache.

- Set `TRITON_HOME=/some/path` to change the location of the `.triton`
  directory where Triton's cache is located and downloads are stored
  during the build. By default, this is the user's home directory. It
  can be changed anytime.

- Pass `--no-build-isolation` to `pip install` to make nop builds faster.
  Without this, every invocation of `pip install` uses a different symlink to
  cmake, and this forces ninja to rebuild most of the `.a` files.

- vscode intellisense has some difficulty figuring out how to build Triton's C++
  (probably because, in our build, users don't invoke cmake directly, but
  instead use setup.py).  Teach vscode how to compile Triton as follows.

    - Do a local build. Run command `pip install -e python`
    - Get the full path to the `compile_commands.json` file produced by the build:
      `find python/build -name 'compile_commands.json' | xargs readlink -f`.
      You might get a full path similar to `/Users/{username}/triton/python/build/cmake.macosx-11.1-arm64-cpython-3.12/compile_commands.json`
    - In vscode, install the
      [C/C++
      extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools),
      then open the command palette (`Shift + Command + P` on Mac, or `Shift +
      Ctrl + P` on Windows/Linux) and open `C/C++: Edit Configurations (UI)`.
    - Open "Advanced Settings" and paste the full path to
      `compile_commands.json` into the "Compile Commands" textbox.

# Running tests

There currently isn't a turnkey way to run all the Triton tests, but you can
follow the following recipe.

```shell
# One-time setup.  Note we have to reinstall local Triton because torch
# overwrites it with the public version.
$ pip install scipy numpy torch pytest lit pandas matplotlib && pip install -e python

# Run Python tests using your local GPU.
$ python3 -m pytest python/test/unit

# Move to builddir.  Fill in <...> with the full path, e.g.
# `cmake.linux-x86_64-cpython-3.11`.
$ cd python/build/cmake<...>

# Run C++ unit tests.
$ ctest -j32

# Run lit tests.
$ lit test
```

You may find it helpful to make a symlink to the builddir and tell your local
git to ignore it.

```
$ ln -s python/build/cmake<...> build
$ echo build >> .git/info/exclude
```

Then you can e.g. rebuild and run lit with the following command.

```
$ ninja -C build && ( cd build ; lit test )
```

# Tips for hacking

For detailed instructions on how to debug Triton's frontend, please refer to this [tutorial](https://triton-lang.org/main/programming-guide/chapter-3/debugging.html). The following includes additional tips for hacking on Triton's backend.

**Helpful environment variables**

- `MLIR_ENABLE_DUMP=1` dumps the IR before every MLIR pass Triton runs, for all
   kernels. Use `MLIR_ENABLE_DUMP=kernelName` to dump for a specific kernel only.
- `LLVM_IR_ENABLE_DUMP=1` dumps the IR before every pass run over the LLVM IR.
- `TRITON_INTERPRET=1` uses the Triton interpreter instead of running on the
  GPU.  You can insert Python breakpoints in your kernel code!
- `TRITON_ENABLE_LLVM_DEBUG=1` passes `-debug` to LLVM, printing a lot of
  debugging information to stdout.  If this is too noisy, run with just
  `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY` instead to limit the output.

  An alternative way to reduce output noisiness is running with
  `LLVM_IR_ENABLE_DUMP=1`, extract the IR before the LLVM pass of interest, and
  then run LLVM's `opt` standalone, perhaps passing `-debug-only=foo` on the
  command line.
- `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY=<comma-separated>` is the equivalent of LLVM's
  `-debug-only` command-line option. This limits the LLVM debug output to
  specific pass or component names (which are specified using `#define
  DEBUG_TYPE` throughout LLVM and Triton) in order to allow the debug output to
  be less noisy. `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY` allows for one or more comma
  separated values to be specified (eg
  `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY="tritongpu-remove-layout-conversions` or
  `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY="tritongpu-remove-layout-conversions,regalloc"`).
- `USE_IR_LOC={ttir,ttgir}` reparses the IR such that the location information
  will be the line number of the IR file with that particular extension,
  instead of line number of the python file. This can provide a direct mapping
  from the IR to llir/ptx. When used with performance tools, it can provide a
  breakdown on IR instructions.
- `TRITON_PRINT_AUTOTUNING=1` prints out the best autotuning config and total time
  spent for each kernel after autotuning is complete.
- `DISABLE_LLVM_OPT` will disable llvm optimizations for make_llir and make_ptx
  if its value is true when parsing as Bool. Otherwise, it will be parsed as a list
  of flags to disable llvm optimizations. One usage case is
  `DISABLE_LLVM_OPT="disable-lsr"`
  Loop strength reduction is known to cause up to 10% performance changes for
  certain kernels with register pressure.
- `TRITON_ALWAYS_COMPILE=1` forces to compile kernels regardless of cache hit.
- `MLIR_ENABLE_TIMING` dumps the timing information for each MLIR pass.
- `LLVM_ENABLE_TIMING` dumps the timing information for each LLVM pass.
- `TRITON_DEFAULT_FP_FUSION` overrides the default behavior of allowing fp fusion (mul+add->fma).
- `MLIR_ENABLE_REMARK` enables the performance warnings that are emitted as remarks.

# Changelog

Version 2.0 is out! New features include:
- Many, many bug fixes
- Performance improvements
- Backend rewritten to use MLIR
- Support for kernels that contain back-to-back matmuls (e.g., flash attention)

# Contributing

Community contributions are more than welcome, whether it be to fix bugs or to add new features at [github](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/). For more detailed instructions, please visit our [contributor's guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).


# Compatibility

Supported Platforms:
  * Linux

Supported Hardware:
  * NVIDIA GPUs (Compute Capability 7.0+)
  * AMD GPUs (ROCm 5.2+)
  * Under development: CPUs

Commit message:

Workaround for MLIR_ENABLE_DUMP being ignored

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <img src="https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/wzQKEsTFkrgNQO9JjhGH5wFvslJr1saLtLaJ_a6Fp_gNENpvt3VG7BmztwngU9hFJaU4CPwGiw1opQtDvTkLrxWRbO_a12Q-pdESWHgtmheIHcPbOL5ZMC4TSiJVe5ty1w=w3517" alt="Triton logo">
</div>

The Triton Conference is happening again on September 17th, 2024 in Fremont (CA)!

If you are interested in attending, please fill up [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSecHC1lkalcm0h3JDUbspekDX5bmBvMxgVTLaK3e-61bzDDbg/viewform).


| **`Documentation`** | **`Nightly Wheels`** |
|-------------------- | -------------------- |
| [![Documentation](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/actions/workflows/documentation.yml/badge.svg)](https://triton-lang.org/) | [![Wheels](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/actions/workflows/wheels.yml/badge.svg?branch=release/2.0.x)](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/actions/workflows/wheels.yml) |


# Triton

This is the development repository of Triton, a language and compiler for writing highly efficient custom Deep-Learning primitives. The aim of Triton is to provide an open-source environment to write fast code at higher productivity than CUDA, but also with higher flexibility than other existing DSLs.

The foundations of this project are described in the following MAPL2019 publication: [Triton: An Intermediate Language and Compiler for Tiled Neural Network Computations](http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~htk/publication/2019-mapl-tillet-kung-cox.pdf). Please consider citing this work if you use Triton!

The [official documentation](https://triton-lang.org) contains installation instructions and tutorials.  See also these third-party [Triton puzzles](https://github.com/srush/Triton-Puzzles), which can all be run using the Triton interpreter -- no GPU required.

# Quick Installation

You can install the latest stable release of Triton from pip:

```bash
pip install triton
```
Binary wheels are available for CPython 3.8-3.12 and PyPy 3.8-3.9.

And the latest nightly release:

```bash
pip install -U --index-url https://aiinfra.pkgs.visualstudio.com/PublicPackages/_packaging/Triton-Nightly/pypi/simple/ triton-nightly
```

# Install from source

```
git clone https://github.com/triton-lang/triton.git;
cd triton;

pip install ninja cmake wheel pybind11; # build-time dependencies
pip install -e python
```

Or with a virtualenv:

```
git clone https://github.com/triton-lang/triton.git;
cd triton;

python -m venv .venv --prompt triton;
source .venv/bin/activate;

pip install ninja cmake wheel pybind11; # build-time dependencies
pip install -e python
```

# Building with a custom LLVM

Triton uses LLVM to generate code for GPUs and CPUs.  Normally, the Triton build
downloads a prebuilt LLVM, but you can also build LLVM from source and use that.

LLVM does not have a stable API, so the Triton build will not work at an
arbitrary LLVM version.

1. Find the version of LLVM that Triton builds against.  Check
`cmake/llvm-hash.txt` to see the current version. For example, if it says:
       49af6502c6dcb4a7f7520178bd14df396f78240c

   This means that the version of Triton you have builds against
   [LLVM](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project) 49af6502.

2. `git checkout` LLVM at this revision.  Optionally, make additional
   modifications to LLVM.

3. [Build LLVM](https://llvm.org/docs/CMake.html).  For example, you might run

       $ cd $HOME/llvm-project  # your clone of LLVM.
       $ mkdir build
       $ cd build
       $ cmake -G Ninja -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON ../llvm -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="mlir;llvm" -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="host;NVPTX;AMDGPU"
       $ ninja

4. Grab a snack, this will take a while.

5. Build Triton as above, but set the following environment variables.

       # Modify as appropriate to point to your LLVM build.
       $ export LLVM_BUILD_DIR=$HOME/llvm-project/build

       $ cd <triton install>
       $ LLVM_INCLUDE_DIRS=$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/include \
         LLVM_LIBRARY_DIR=$LLVM_BUILD_DIR/lib \
         LLVM_SYSPATH=$LLVM_BUILD_DIR \
         pip install -e python

# Tips for building

- Set `TRITON_BUILD_WITH_CLANG_LLD=true` as an environment variable to use clang
  and lld.  lld in particular results in faster builds.

- Set `TRITON_BUILD_WITH_CCACHE=true` to build with ccache.

- Set `TRITON_HOME=/some/path` to change the location of the `.triton`
  directory where Triton's cache is located and downloads are stored
  during the build. By default, this is the user's home directory. It
  can be changed anytime.

- Pass `--no-build-isolation` to `pip install` to make nop builds faster.
  Without this, every invocation of `pip install` uses a different symlink to
  cmake, and this forces ninja to rebuild most of the `.a` files.

- vscode intellisense has some difficulty figuring out how to build Triton's C++
  (probably because, in our build, users don't invoke cmake directly, but
  instead use setup.py).  Teach vscode how to compile Triton as follows.

    - Do a local build. Run command `pip install -e python`
    - Get the full path to the `compile_commands.json` file produced by the build:
      `find python/build -name 'compile_commands.json' | xargs readlink -f`.
      You might get a full path similar to `/Users/{username}/triton/python/build/cmake.macosx-11.1-arm64-cpython-3.12/compile_commands.json`
    - In vscode, install the
      [C/C++
      extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools),
      then open the command palette (`Shift + Command + P` on Mac, or `Shift +
      Ctrl + P` on Windows/Linux) and open `C/C++: Edit Configurations (UI)`.
    - Open "Advanced Settings" and paste the full path to
      `compile_commands.json` into the "Compile Commands" textbox.

# Running tests

There currently isn't a turnkey way to run all the Triton tests, but you can
follow the following recipe.

```shell
# One-time setup.  Note we have to reinstall local Triton because torch
# overwrites it with the public version.
$ pip install scipy numpy torch pytest lit pandas matplotlib && pip install -e python

# Run Python tests using your local GPU.
$ python3 -m pytest python/test/unit

# Move to builddir.  Fill in <...> with the full path, e.g.
# `cmake.linux-x86_64-cpython-3.11`.
$ cd python/build/cmake<...>

# Run C++ unit tests.
$ ctest -j32

# Run lit tests.
$ lit test
```

You may find it helpful to make a symlink to the builddir and tell your local
git to ignore it.

```
$ ln -s python/build/cmake<...> build
$ echo build >> .git/info/exclude
```

Then you can e.g. rebuild and run lit with the following command.

```
$ ninja -C build && ( cd build ; lit test )
```

# Tips for hacking

For detailed instructions on how to debug Triton's frontend, please refer to this [tutorial](https://triton-lang.org/main/programming-guide/chapter-3/debugging.html). The following includes additional tips for hacking on Triton's backend.

**Helpful environment variables**

- `MLIR_ENABLE_DUMP=1` dumps the IR before every MLIR pass Triton runs, for all
   kernels. Use `MLIR_ENABLE_DUMP=kernelName` to dump for a specific kernel only.
  - Triton cache can interfere with the dump. In cases where `MLIR_ENABLE_DUMP=1` does not work, try cleaning your triton cache: `rm -r ~/.triton/cache/*`
- `LLVM_IR_ENABLE_DUMP=1` dumps the IR before every pass run over the LLVM IR.
- `TRITON_INTERPRET=1` uses the Triton interpreter instead of running on the
  GPU.  You can insert Python breakpoints in your kernel code!
- `TRITON_ENABLE_LLVM_DEBUG=1` passes `-debug` to LLVM, printing a lot of
  debugging information to stdout.  If this is too noisy, run with just
  `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY` instead to limit the output.

  An alternative way to reduce output noisiness is running with
  `LLVM_IR_ENABLE_DUMP=1`, extract the IR before the LLVM pass of interest, and
  then run LLVM's `opt` standalone, perhaps passing `-debug-only=foo` on the
  command line.
- `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY=<comma-separated>` is the equivalent of LLVM's
  `-debug-only` command-line option. This limits the LLVM debug output to
  specific pass or component names (which are specified using `#define
  DEBUG_TYPE` throughout LLVM and Triton) in order to allow the debug output to
  be less noisy. `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY` allows for one or more comma
  separated values to be specified (eg
  `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY="tritongpu-remove-layout-conversions` or
  `TRITON_LLVM_DEBUG_ONLY="tritongpu-remove-layout-conversions,regalloc"`).
- `USE_IR_LOC={ttir,ttgir}` reparses the IR such that the location information
  will be the line number of the IR file with that particular extension,
  instead of line number of the python file. This can provide a direct mapping
  from the IR to llir/ptx. When used with performance tools, it can provide a
  breakdown on IR instructions.
- `TRITON_PRINT_AUTOTUNING=1` prints out the best autotuning config and total time
  spent for each kernel after autotuning is complete.
- `DISABLE_LLVM_OPT` will disable llvm optimizations for make_llir and make_ptx
  if its value is true when parsing as Bool. Otherwise, it will be parsed as a list
  of flags to disable llvm optimizations. One usage case is
  `DISABLE_LLVM_OPT="disable-lsr"`
  Loop strength reduction is known to cause up to 10% performance changes for
  certain kernels with register pressure.
- `TRITON_ALWAYS_COMPILE=1` forces to compile kernels regardless of cache hit.
- `MLIR_ENABLE_TIMING` dumps the timing information for each MLIR pass.
- `LLVM_ENABLE_TIMING` dumps the timing information for each LLVM pass.
- `TRITON_DEFAULT_FP_FUSION` overrides the default behavior of allowing fp fusion (mul+add->fma).
- `MLIR_ENABLE_REMARK` enables the performance warnings that are emitted as remarks.

# Changelog

Version 2.0 is out! New features include:
- Many, many bug fixes
- Performance improvements
- Backend rewritten to use MLIR
- Support for kernels that contain back-to-back matmuls (e.g., flash attention)

# Contributing

Community contributions are more than welcome, whether it be to fix bugs or to add new features at [github](https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/). For more detailed instructions, please visit our [contributor's guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).


# Compatibility

Supported Platforms:
  * Linux

Supported Hardware:
  * NVIDIA GPUs (Compute Capability 7.0+)
  * AMD GPUs (ROCm 5.2+)
  * Under development: CPUs
